In computer science, an AVL tree (named after inventors Adelson-Velsky and Landis) is a self-balancing binary search tree. In an AVL tree, the heights of the two child subtrees of any node differ by not more than one; if at any time they differ by more than one, rebalancing is done to restore this property. Lookup, insertion, and deletion all take O(log n) time in both the average and worst cases, where n is the number of nodes in the tree prior to the operation. Insertions and deletions may require the tree to be rebalanced by one or more tree rotations.
The AVL tree is named after its two Soviet inventors, Georgy Adelson-Velsky and Evgenii Landis, who published it in their 1962 paper "An algorithm for the organization of information". It is the first self-balancing binary search tree data structure to be invented.
AVL trees are often compared with red–black trees because both support the same set of operations and take O(log n) time for the basic operations. For lookup-intensive applications, AVL trees are faster than red–black trees because they are more strictly balanced. Similar to red–black trees, AVL trees are height-balanced.
Both AVL trees and red–black (RB) trees are self-balancing binary search trees and they are related mathematically. Indeed, every AVL tree can be colored red–black, but there are RB trees which are not AVL balanced. For maintaining the AVL (or RB) tree's invariants, rotations play an important role.
RB insertions and deletions and AVL insertions require from zero to three tail-recursive rotations and run in amortized O(1) time, thus equally constant on average. AVL deletions requiring O(log n) rotations in the worst case are also O(1) on average.
Since with a single deletion the height of an AVL subtree cannot decrease by more than one, the temporary balance factor of a node will be in the range from −2 to +2. If the balance factor remains in the range from −1 to +1 it can be adjusted in accord with the AVL rules. If it becomes ±2 then the subtree is unbalanced and needs to be rotated. (Unlike insertion where a rotation always balances the tree, after delete, there may be BF(Z) ≠ 0, so that after the appropriate single or double rotation the height of the rebalanced subtree decreases by one meaning that the tree has to be rebalanced again on the next higher level.)
Right Right: X is rebalanced with a simple rotation rotate_Left. Left Left: X is rebalanced with a simple rotation rotate_Right (mirror-image). Right Left: X is rebalanced with a double rotation rotate_RightLeft. Left Right: X is rebalanced with a double rotation rotate_LeftRight (mirror-image).
Space complexity: O(n). Search: O(log n) amortized, O(log n) worst case. Insert: O(log n) amortized, O(log n) worst case. Delete: O(log n) amortized, O(log n) worst case.
